In this video, we're going to
look at how we can
make our data more
self-documenting by
applying trend-based
conditional formats.
A conditional format
is where Excel will
make a cell look different
based on some criteria.
With the trend-based
conditional formats,
it compares a dataset
against itself and basically
ranks all the values in
that data and applies
formatting accordingly.
In this case scenario,
Rowan has been given data
on waste management in
Australian states and
asked to make it easy for
people to quickly spot
trends and anomalies.
For example, we're
going to scroll down to
our Resource and recovery
and recycling rates.
Rowan would like to make it very
obvious where we're producing
large amounts of landfill.
We're going to select the
data from E30 down to E37,
and then we're going to
come up to our Home tab in
our ribbon and click
"Conditional Formatting."
The first two options
are value-based
conditional formats,
which we'll look at
in the next video.
Well, we're going to be
focusing on all these three,
which are our trend-based.
We'll start with the color scale.
Now, Rowan wants where we have
a high level of landfill
for it to show in red,
going through orange, yellow,
and green for the lower values.
To achieve that, we're
going to go for the red,
yellow, green color scale.
Then, as you hover over
the different options,
you'll see you can choose
whichever one suits your data.
I'm just going to click
to apply. Really easy.
You're not limited to just
a column or just a row,
you can apply to an
entire block of data.
Let's do the same for resource
recovery rates by region.
I'm going to click on C18
and drag down to H25.
Again, come to
conditional formats.
Resource recovery
rates, we want the
high results recovery rates
this time to be green,
so we're going to
come to color scales.
I'm going to choose the
first option this time,
and there's our data
nicely formatted.
The potential downsides with
the color scales is
they are quite busy
and if you don't provide
a key it might not be
totally intuitive.
Let's look now at
how we can remove
a conditional format
and then we'll apply
one that might be a little
better for this data.
I'm going to come back to
Conditional Formatting,
and this time I'm going to
come down to Clear Rules.
You'll see you have the
option to clear from
these selected cells or
from the entire sheet.
We want to clear from selected
cells. Easy come, easy go.
Still with your data selected,
we're going to come back
to Conditional Formatting
and this time we're
going to have a look
at the Data Bars,
hover over the different options.
I'm going to go to
the light blue,
but you can choose
any color you like.
You can see it's almost
like applying a chart.
The larger values, the bar is
almost the whole way across
the cell whereas
the smaller values,
you get a much smaller bar.
Now, the way it works with
all the trend-based
formats is by default,
it starts with the lowest
value as the bottom of
the set and the highest
value at the top of the set.
In a moment, we will
look at actually
how you can modify that.
But for this one,
it's looking great.
We're just going to left-align
the text and maybe
make it a size nine.
One more example we're
going to look at,
which is icon sets.
We can apply the icon sets
to the data in the cell.
But in this particular example,
we'd actually like to put
it in a separate cell.
Can I ask you to click into J18,
type equals and click onto
your cumulative growth rate
in I18 and press "Enter".
We'll then just click back and
double-click the fill
handle to copy that down.
Then, with your data
still selected,
we're going to come up to
Conditional Formatting
and come to Icon Sets.
The icon sets allow you to
categorize your data
really into three, four,
or five categories, and
the category we'd like to
use is the three triangles.
So we're going to click
on that to apply it.
Don't worry about
the hashes because
we're going to get rid
of those in a moment.
But once again, you
can see then it's
taken the top third made
those green triangles,
the middle third has
got the yellow lines,
and the bottom third,
because that value is quite
a lot lower than the others,
has got the red triangle.
But in this case it's
not what we want at all.
We would like all of our
positive growth rates
to have a green triangle and
our negative ones to
have a red triangle,
and if there's been no change,
to see the yellow line.
We're now going to look
at how we can actually
customize our conditional format.
Again, make sure you've
got them selected,
come back to
Conditional Formatting.
We're now going to choose "Manage
Rules" right at the bottom.
By default, you will see
the rules applying to
the current selection.
But if you come up to where
it says Current Selection,
you can actually switch to
this worksheet and see all
the rules in your worksheet,
and from here you can
delete rules you don't
want or edit rules.
We're going to edit
the icon set rules,
so we're going to click on it
and then click "Edit Rule."
We could switch it out for
a completely different
trend-based format if
we wanted and you can
mix and match the icons,
but you have to select
from the icons provided.
You can also change
the boundaries.
You can see at the
moment it's making
the top 33 percent green.
We actually want all the
positive numbers to be green.
We're going to switch percent to
number and then we're going
to say greater than zero.
It doesn't include zero.
Then, the second group,
we're going to make
that number as well.
I'm going to say greater
than or equal to zero.
Now, that seems a bit odd,
but the ones that are
greater than zero are
already getting a green triangle.
This will only pick
up the equal to zero,
and everything else will
get a red triangle.
One more thing, we want
to show icons only.
I'm going to tick in that box,
and we're going to say Okay.
At this point you don't
have to press "Apply"
unless you want to do
something else in this dialog.
You can just click "Okay"
and there are icons clearly
showing where there's been
an increase or a decrease in
our cumulative growth rate.
We've looked at three types
of trained-based
conditional formats.
In the next video,
we're going to have
a look at value-based
conditional formatting.